Good afternoon and
welcome to session 507,
which is about audio and MIDI.
I'm Craig Keithley.
I'm Apple's USB and FireWire evangelist.
As I mentioned in the session yesterday,
audio is one of my favorite topics,
and so I'm happy to help
with this session today.
Some of the topics we're going to talk
about are going to be the core audio,
how, and I'm going to bring
Jeff Moore up here in a second.
Before I do,
I just want to say that some of
today's equipment is kind of special.
We work closely with Harman
Kardon on a lot of areas.
As you can see,
we've got JBL speakers all around here.
We've got a high-end Harman
Kardon AVR-8000 that's doing AC3
or SPDIF to multi-channel decode.
We like Harman.
They do a lot of good things for us.
Thank you very much.
Jeff.
So as Craig said, my name is Jeff Moore.
I'm an engineer with
the Core Audio Group.
I'm going to tell you a little
bit about the HAL today.
I hope to impart the anatomy
of how things work and at least
get you kind of familiarized
with how the API is laid out.
So as most of you know,
the HAL provides the lowest level
access to audio devices in Mac OS X.
The HAL supports pretty much any
kind of audio device you can imagine,
as long as there's a driver for it,
from simple consumer
gear to complex pro gear.
The key things that we do
with the HAL is multi-channel,
high sample rates,
and new with Jaguar this year is
support for nonlinear PCM formats
to be sent to hardware.
To get you started with the HAL API,
you should know that it's a
loosely object-oriented API,
but it's a C API.
Understanding the object
hierarchy is important for
understanding how the HAL works.
One of the common things you'll find with
all the Core Audio APIs is that we use
what we call properties to provide access
to a manipulation of state and behavior
of all different kinds of objects.
What I say about properties here are
generally true for properties just
about anywhere in the audio system.
So, property objects are
addressed as key-value pairs.
The keys will vary from object
to object and API to API,
but they will always
include an integer ID.
And the value is always an untyped
block of memory whose contents is going
to be predetermined based on the ID.
In the HAL,
all the get property info routines
for the various objects provide
you with the size of the property
as well as whether or not you
can actually set that property.
A lot of properties don't
necessarily require you to call
get property info because their
size is always predetermined.
A good example is the
buffer size of the HAL,
which is always going
to be a 32-bit integer.
So the HAL also provides notifications
for when property value changes.
The client can sign up for notifications
for all properties that the HAL provides,
and they just provide a property
listener proc to the HAL through the
appropriate add property listener calls.
The other thing that makes this a little
easier is that the HAL supports wildcards
for the various different aspects of what
you have to set up to get a listener.
An example is you might want to listen
to all the properties on a given channel,
or you just might want to listen to all
the volume notifications for this device.
The permutations can get pretty rich.
Your listener proc is going to get
called on the HAL's CF run loop.
The HAL provides a global property
in each process to allow you to
actually manage what this CF run
loop is and what thread it runs on.
For most Carbon and Cocoa-based apps,
you're going to want to actually set
this run loop to your app's main run
loop to allow you to do things like draw
when the property listener fires off.
Another thing to remember about
properties in the how is that changing
them is an asynchronous operation.
You definitely want to wait for
a notification to come back from
the system before you assume that
the value has actually changed.
A common place where people have
been falling into this trap is when
setting the formats of a device.
You definitely don't want to
assume the format is just set
when you call set property.
You want to wait until you get the
appropriate notifications back.
So it's very important that you sign up
for all the notifications that you need.
The first object that I'd
like to talk about in the
HAL is the HAL system object.
It's addressed in the
API for the routines that are
prefixed with audio hardware.
Its job is to manage the
process global state for the
HAL in that individual process.
Its properties are only
addressed by their four care IDs.
Some of the interesting properties
in the global object are going
to be the device list property,
K-audio hardware property devices,
the run loop property,
which I mentioned previously,
as well as a new property
that we've added,
which is something you
should pay attention to.
If you're using audio sporadically,
you will probably want... New in Jaguar,
the HAL has brought in a new property
that will prevent it from unloading
itself after a given timeout.
there's a property that allows
you to turn that on and off.
The next object in the how
is the audio device object.
The audio device object is
the basic unit for doing I.O.
and also for doing timing.
The properties in the device
object are addressed by the ID,
the direction for the section
that the property applies to,
and that's going to be input or output,
and what individual channel
that you're speaking about.
Some important properties that
you have for the device object
are the buffer frame size,
which allows you to
change the size of I.O.
that you do in each I.O.
proc,
as well as the stream configuration,
which allows you to get the buffer
layout of the device prior to your I.O.
proc being called so you know
what to expect when your I.O.
proc is called.
Then you can change the device's format
using the stream format property.
The devices are broken down
into stream objects as well.
Stream objects represent a single
buffer of I/O on the device.
Their properties are adjusted
just by the ID and the channel.
The direction is implicit
in the stream itself,
because streams can only
be either input or output.
Some of the stream properties that
you're going to be interested in getting
a hold of is the starting channel,
which tells you what channel number that
that stream's first channel applies to.
If you have a multi-channel
device with multiple streams and
you're looking at just a stream,
you need to know this is
channel 5 out of 8 or whatever.
Then you can also set the
format for the device,
the physical format,
which is a little different
from the virtual format.
This is the device that the
audio and MIDI system uses.
This is the format that the device is
actually doing I/O with the hardware on.
That would be like 16-bit
integer versus 24-bit integer,
for instance.
So that pretty much wraps up
kind of what the HAL looks like.
I'm going to talk a little bit,
I'm going to show you a little
bit some of these concepts in a
moment with some of our new stuff,
but I'm also going to talk a lot,
show you a lot about playing
an AC3 file now with the HAL,
sending it straight to
hardware for decoding.
Before we get started,
I'll tell you a little
bit about AC3 bit streams.
Each packet is 1536 frames in size.
That's roughly 30
milliseconds of time at 48K.
Each packet does vary in byte size.
AC3 is implicitly a
variable bit rate format.
Each packet, much like MPEG,
starts with a 16-bit sync word.
To get AC3 into a format that you can
put on a digital interface like SPDIF,
you have to add an
additional 8-byte header.
I'm going to go in to show you
a little bit about that as well.
Could we bring up demo four, please?
Thank you.
So the first thing I want to show you is
a new application that we have in Jaguar
called the Audio MIDI Setup application.
It is a richer UI on the
individual audio devices as well
as configuring MIDI devices.
I'm going to tell you a little
bit about its audio support,
and we'll hear about the
MIDI support a little bit later.
As you can see,
it gives you a dashboard interface
on pretty much what a HAL device is.
Here you see the built-in controller,
and it's showing up
exactly what it can do.
In this case,
the built-in audio controller doesn't
support a global input and output volume,
but it does support a global
out/mute button as well as a
global play-through option.
Each of the individual
channels has volume,
as you can see down here.
So when we go to other devices,
like the USB AudioSport MD-1,
which I'll be using to
demonstrate our AC3 playback,
you can see that this device is
a USB device and... Where is it?
I'll show it to you.
Here it is.
As you can see,
it's a very small digital output.
It connects over the USB bus,
and it provides an
optical SPDIF connection.
So you can change the default
device and you can get and set
the device's format as well.
As you can see right now,
the device's format is set up for AC3.
You can move it around.
This device happens to support all
sorts of different sample rates and
a couple of different bit depths.
I'm going to be playing an AC3 file,
so I'm just going to set it up for AC3
So to play an AC3 file,
I've written a small command line
tool that parses an AC3 file and
doles out the packets to the hardware.
The I.O.
path for dealing with encoded audio
is slightly different for dealing
with normal linear PCM audio.
The key difference is, in your I.O.
proc, when you provide data
back to the output buffer,
you also need to change the data size
to say how many bytes you've provided.
For constant bitrate formats like
the AC3 on the digital interface,
the number of bytes is
always going to be the same.
But if you're talking about a
variable bitrate AC3 format,
that number will change with every frame.
The structure of my little command
line tool is I've abstracted out
each device into a little C++ object.
Here's the initialized routine.
One of the other interesting things
that we've added in Jaguar to the HAL is
the ability to turn individual streams
on and off for each individual I.O.
proc.
If you're not using the input section,
you should go in and turn it off.
I'll show you some code here in a
second that shows how to do that.
Here's the C++ method in my
device superclass that allows me
to call the HAL API to tell it,
hey, turn off this set of input streams.
It takes an array of bools in
to say which streams to leave on
and which streams to leave off.
The HAL API actually uses UN32s
to carry those boolean values.
It has to construct the list,
which must match the stream
configuration of the device.
You can't have less streams.
You can't specify more streams.
It must be precise.
It gets the number of streams,
and it allocates a buffer.
Then it stuffs in all
those boolean values.
Then all you have to do to tell
the HAL to turn off the streams
for that IOPROC is to just set
the property on the device.
Here you see an example.
I'm calling audio device set property,
where it's passing in the device
ID that we're working with,
the IOPROC stream usage
property for the output section.
The channel number on this
isn't really important,
so you can put anything.
In this case, I put one,
which is a fine idea when in doubt.
Then you just pass in the size and
the pointer that has the struct
containing the stream usage.
So once you've turned
off all the streams,
the next thing to do is to open the file.
You parse the file.
You'll get the packetization that
I described earlier for the file.
And then you register your I/O proc.
And once you've done that,
you've just got to feed the
data back to the output buffers.
And the way you do that
is a little different.
Here's the I/O proc for this.
No, that's not it.
Here's the I/O proc for this device,
or for this application.
It comes in.
Now, this code is a little simplistic,
so it makes the assumption that the
device only really ever has one stream,
and that's the stream it's
going to be doing I/O on.
In reality,
you'll probably want to change
that based on the number of
streams the device really has.
So, for here, we get the device,
we cast it to a pointer to bytes,
so that later on when we're
going to copy the data,
the AC3 data into, um, the AC3 data,
we're
[Transcript missing]
The first thing it does is reinterpret
the buffer as a 16-bit buffer,
because AC3 is inherently
a two-byte format.
Then it just starts
stuffing in the header.
For the digital interface for AC3,
there are some bits that you have
to fill out that are based on
the actual values in the stream.
You fill out the sync word,
and then you fill out all the
appropriate stuff for the header.
And then you just copy the next
buffer into the output buffer.
Now, a key thing to remember about the
constant bitrate AC3 is quite often
the data needs to be little-endian.
On the disk,
AC3 is almost always big-endian.
So once you're done,
you have to go through and
byte swap everything so it gets
put out on the wire correctly.
And here's some code for doing that.
And then once you're done,
it just updates the file position
and writes back out to the
The data size that it just wrote.
Now I'm going to play some AC3 files
to give you a feel for what's going on
and show that it actually all works.
So the first file is
kind of a noisy file,
but it'll show that there's
sound coming out of each channel.
That's a test file that just puts a
different sound source in each channel.
Here's another test file that's
some more musical content.
To close this off,
I wish I could turn this around.
You can see that we've got this
big Carmen Harden amp that's
doing the decoding for us.
You can see all the channel
lights turning on and off.
It's just coming straight over
the optical spit of connection.
To close out,
I'd like to just ask all the hardware
developers to please make every
effort you can to conform to the
relevant spec governing your hardware.
One of the key things that we've
had bringing up the support is that
some devices will say they can do
digital I/O and some devices won't,
even though they have a
digital connection on them.
It's very hard for us to do
the right thing if you're
not conforming to the spec.
With that,
I'd like to bring up Doug Wyatt,
and he's going to
discuss the MIDI support.
Thanks, Jeff.
Good afternoon.
I'm Doug Wyatt.
I'm an engineer in the Core Audio Group.
I work on various pieces of the system,
but I'm primarily responsible
for the Core MIDI framework.
So today,
I recognize there are some of you who
haven't worked with core MIDI before,
but there are probably a lot of
you who have seen me give the
same talk two years in a row,
going through all the basics of the API.
So as I figured out how
I was going to organize this,
I thought, okay,
we'll just go through the
API concept by concept,
and we'll touch on the areas that
are causing a lot of questions
for developers and introduce
some new features for Jaguar.
So architecturally,
core MIDI sits on top of
I/O Kit and the kernel.
and we have higher level services in
the audio toolbox that also use core
MIDI such as the sequencing services and
the AU MIDI controller for controlling
music devices and audio units.
And your client application, of course,
can also talk to core MIDI directly for
high performance access to MIDI devices.
So looking at the core
MIDI implementation,
Down in the kernel we have the I/O Kit,
where we do all our I/O.
We have a MIDI server process,
which is in user space.
The MIDI server loads MIDI drivers,
which are CFPlugins.
And on top of that,
we have the core MIDI framework,
which your client
application links against.
The core MIDI framework uses
Mach interprocess communication to
talk to the MIDI server and implement
the API that your application uses.
So the first concept I'd like
to go over in the API is the
MIDI device entity and endpoint.
These structures are hierarchical.
Devices contain entities,
which are logically
distinct subcomponents.
One example is a multiport
MIDI interface like this Roland device
we have on the screen here,
or Edderall, I should say.
This is a graphic from our
audio MIDI setup application,
which Jeff showed you,
and I'll be showing you the MIDI pane
in that application in a moment.
So the big -- you know,
the device itself has an icon.
These little nubs
underneath are the entities,
and an entity is simply a grouping
of source and destination endpoints.
And so we see this device publishes
itself as having nine entities,
each with one source and
one destination endpoint.
So these are driver-owned devices which
are distinct from external devices,
which I'll bring up later in the talk.
Okay,
contrary to what Jeff was just saying
about most of our property APIs using--
and So, in terms of the integer
keys and void types,
the MIDI API is a bit different.
Our properties in the MIDI API have
to use strings for their keys
for some implementation reasons.
But in any case, the concept is the same.
Devices and entities and endpoints
all have these properties.
and furthermore,
since devices contain entities
which contain endpoints,
we have an inheritance mechanism
in place for these properties.
So, for instance,
the device has a property saying
that its manufacturer name is XCorp.
But if you were to ask the endpoint
for the manufacturer property,
it would be inheriting that
property from the device.
and David But by contrast,
the name property is set separately
on each of these three objects.
The device has a name,
the entity has a name,
and the endpoint has a name.
So properties can either be
inherited or set individually
on the objects in the API.
So on these driver-created objects,
the driver will set the properties.
And as far as the standard properties go,
your application shouldn't
be touching those properties
on the driver-owned devices.
You can look at them,
and that's what they're there for.
They're there for you to interrogate.
But you shouldn't touch
the standard properties.
But if you have some reason to
store private information attached
to a device or entity or endpoint,
you can attach a private property.
And the header file
tells you how to do that.
One thing that has come up as people
use the MIDI APIs is a bit of confusion
about how to display the names of
the source and destination endpoints.
Since there are names at all
three levels of the hierarchy,
the simplest way to do this,
which seems to be most reliable and
provide the best user experience,
is to first ask for the endpoint name.
In the case of that Roland interface,
which I showed you a moment ago,
you might just see port 1, port 2,
port 3, and so on.
In a lot of situations,
if there's only one
MIDI interface in the system,
that will be a unique name,
and that's all you really
need to show the user.
If it's not unique, there might be two of
those MIDI interfaces,
then you can prepend the device
name to the endpoint name,
and that should give you a unique name.
Another thing that has come
up as people use the APIs,
there's a bit of confusion about how
to actually go and locate MIDI sources
and destinations in the system.
And there's two completely different
ways to find these endpoints,
and they each have their uses.
When you're doing MIDI.io,
The recommended way,
and this is true for most circumstances,
is the first method here,
which is to just iterate
through the source and
destination endpoints directly.
There are the functions
MIDI get number of sources,
get number of destinations,
MIDI get source by index.
That's not the name of the function.
It's just called MIDI get source,
but you're passing it one of the indexes.
And that's the best
way to find endpoints.
And you have to use that set of
APIs if you want to see virtual
sources and destinations.
There are some specialized
circumstances where you want to
walk through the device tree and see
absolutely everything that's there.
So you can index through the
devices in the system and find out,
and then you can walk through
each device's entities and
each entity's endpoints.
And that way you'll see even more
endpoints in some situations.
But one reason you might want to do that
is if you're doing some sort of studio.
If you're doing a studio setup view,
you might want to actually show the
objects which aren't present right now.
But of course the danger in doing
this hierarchical walk is that
you will see some special objects.
You'll see some offline endpoints.
Offline meaning an endpoint for a piece
of hardware that isn't present right now.
So there's an offline property that you
would have to look at if you're walking
through the studio in this manner.
You may also see some
objects that are private,
which is another property that drivers
can attach to their end points.
And they're not doing that to
try to hide things from you.
There are situations where drivers
may wish to create end points for
their own applications to have
private communication channels
to the device for configuring it.
So you'll probably want to
hide those private end points.
They're really not there
to make sense to the user.
and also if you do this
hierarchical walk you won't see any
virtual sources or destinations,
as you will if you ask directly
for the sources and destinations.
So everything I've spoken
about so far is about the
driver-created objects in the system.
In 10.1, we introduced the concept
of external devices,
but it wasn't a fully
fleshed-out set of APIs.
There wasn't a studio setup editor
where you could really manipulate them.
But with our new audio and
MIDI setup application in Jaguar,
the user will have a way to
create these external devices,
and we fleshed out how those are
going to look to the user and what
the APIs to manipulate them are.
They use the same data structures
as driver-owned devices,
namely MIDI device, MIDI entity,
and MIDI endpoint.
These objects have the same properties.
I'll be describing what those
properties are in more detail later.
But the user adds them to
the system typically with our
audio MIDI setup application.
Although it's using public APIs,
so if you want it to create your own,
there's nothing we can do
to discourage you from that.
And actually,
we encourage you to if you have
some reason you'd like to do that.
You'll be manipulating the
same global database because
you're using the same APIs,
and the two applications should
present -- they should stay in sync
with each other because they're
both manipulating the same data.
Another thing I'd like to emphasize
about these external devices is
that they're completely optional.
They're just there for the user
to tell us what's there beyond
the external MIDI connector.
So instead of displaying
port one to the user,
you can display the actual
name of the MIDI device.
So we have these driver-owned devices
and we have the external devices.
And the way that the connections
between them are represented
is with a property called
midi-property-connection-unique-ID.
Every object in the system, the devices,
entities and end points,
has a 32-bit unique identifier.
So when we want to signify that
a driver-owned end point has a
connection to an external end point,
what we do is we set a property
on the driver end point,
which is the unique ID of the
external device's end point.
As of Jaguar, this property can also be
an array of unique IDs,
so we can signify a fan-out connection.
One MIDI port may be connected to, say,
half a dozen MIDI devices.
So from the application's point of view,
a bit more work's involved to look at
these external devices and entities and
endpoints and obtain their properties.
um, if you like,
you can skip doing this and you can just
present the generic view of the world
that you had in 10.1 with just whatever
information your driver gave you,
but we have this application
so the user can tell you what's
beyond the MIDI cable now.
And so here's how you do it.
After you've followed the
connection unique ID property
to go find the external object,
then you can use the external
object's properties to override
those of the driver-owned object.
So if you want to know
the name of that endpoint,
you could say, okay,
so external endpoint, what's your name?
And you might see something
like DX7 instead of the
driver-owned object's name,
which might be port 1.
But since there are a lot
of possibilities here,
that port one might be connected to,
as I said, five different MIDI devices,
each with different names.
You might think that it might be
simpler to just display port one
if there's a lot of devices there.
You might want to
concatenate all the names.
You might be able to say, oh,
I know that the DX7 is only on channel
one and the D50 is only on channel two.
And so it's a user interface question.
So we make you perform that
look up yourself right now.
So just to go over the properties that
you're going to find on the MIDI devices.
Some of these have
been around since 10.0,
but we have a few new ones for Jaguar.
Looking at a device or its endpoints,
you can find out what MIDI channels
it transmits or receives on.
You can find out what MIDI event
types it sends and receives.
You can ask it whether it supports
general MIDI or MIDI machine control.
And there are a few more
esoteric properties,
and they're all described
in the header file.
Some other things that we've done with
properties that are new for Jaguar.
Since 10.0, we've had a property that
driver-owned endpoints can define
to support scheduling in advance,
which is good for those companies
who have hardware that do hardware
scheduling of outgoing MIDI.
But for virtual destinations,
such as software synths,
we haven't had that
schedule-ahead capability.
So a soft synth would only be
receiving its MIDI just at the moment
it was supposed to be rendering it.
But now in Jaguar,
the creator of the virtual endpoint
can set this property saying,
"I want to be scheduled ahead."
and then the MIDI server will bypass
its normal scheduling process in
delivering the data to that endpoint.
The soft synth will receive its MIDI as
soon as the sender schedules it,
which will hopefully be a
little bit of time in advance,
so that the soft synth can render
in a sample-accurate manner.
Another new property,
as might be obvious from
our setup application,
is that devices have a property on
them for defining an icon or image.
and the creator of a virtual
endpoint can set its own unique ID.
This was actually possible in 10.1,
but we weren't doing any checks to
make sure that it was actually unique,
which could have been quite problematic.
We now defend against that.
And for Jaguar,
we've also defined some new properties
that allow you to attach XML documents
that describe the device's patch names.
We had some properties
along these lines in 10.1,
and as we've worked on the spec,
it became apparent that the property
set needs to be a little more elaborate.
And so the old properties
have been deprecated,
and there's a new one
in place to do this now.
And I'll be describing that
in a little more detail later.
and David On our mailing list,
some developers have been
asking for a few new APIs,
and you asked for them.
We got them.
One is MIDI Object Find by Unique ID.
So given the unique ID of an object,
you don't have to go trundling
through the whole system to
find out what it refers to.
You can quickly just get back a
reference to the object and a constant
to tell you what kind of object it is.
Previously,
you could only walk down through
the device entity endpoint
hierarchy from the top down.
There wasn't any way to
go up that hierarchy.
So we now have APIs to fetch
a device given an entity and
to fetch the entity that owns
One other thing that developers ask
about from time to time is how to save
references to the objects in the API,
such as MIDI endpoints.
What we recommend is that you save both
the object's name and its unique ID.
That way, if the user renames the object,
you'll still have the unique ID,
which won't have changed,
and you'll still get a
reference to the same object.
On the other hand, if that fails,
meaning the object has been deleted,
probably,
you'll still have the object's name to
show the user what it is that he used
to be working with that isn't there now.
Maybe he has to get his
DX7 out of his garage.
In any case, you can show him the name,
and he can use that to decide
what he's going to do about it,
choose a new device or say, "Oh,
I actually don't need
that sound anyways."
Okay, continuing through the MIDI API,
we have the MIDI client object,
whose main purpose is,
aside from just bootstrapping
yourself into the system,
its main purpose is to receive
notifications of changes to
the state of the MIDI system.
You can have more than one per process
if you have a modular application.
And that's just to answer a
frequently asked question.
And for Jaguar, we've changed the way
the notifications work.
In 10.1,
we just had a single notification which
said something in the world's changed,
and you had to go figure out
what it was that changed.
You pretty much had to
interrogate the whole state.
And in Jaguar,
we have these new fine-grained
notifications that say
an object was added,
an object was removed,
or an object's property changed.
Now, for backwards compatibility,
we still have to send the
world change notification,
but if you're handling these new ones,
you can ignore that.
The next object in the
API is the MIDI port object.
Just to clear up a common
source of confusion here,
the MIDI port that you see in the
API isn't a five-pin MIDI connector.
It's a communication channel to
the server like a Mach port or
inter-process communication port.
People seem to get confused about
this at first every now and then.
You only need multiple ports in your
application if you are highly modular or
if you need MIDI merging of your output.
Unlike a five-pin MIDI connector,
one of these communication
ports can communicate with all
of the sources and -- well,
one output port can send to all
of the destinations in the system,
and one input port can receive from
all of the sources in the system.
So another new API that we have in
Jaguar is the MIDI through connection.
This allows you to do MIDI throughing
in the server process where it
can be a lot more efficient than
doing an inter-process communication
message from the server to your
client and then immediately back to
the server just to do MIDI through.
and the rest of the team.
Not only is it convenient,
but it's more efficient.
And we also provide some fairly
extensive MIDI filtering and
mapping functionality here.
And the goal here was to let you
do things like change the channels,
remove event types, and remap controls,
a few more things like that.
I tried to make it as powerful as
I could while keeping it able to
be described in one data structure.
Earlier I mentioned our new properties
for describing a device's patch names
as well as its note and control names.
We're working on a draft of
a spec for this file format,
which we're calling MIDI Name Documents.
The whole goal here is to
integrate into the system what
OMS and FreeMIDI had 10 years ago,
a set of name services,
so users can see things in terms
of their names instead of saying,
"Program change 42," or
"Control 7," for instance.
And this is just a brief little
snippet of XML to give you a
flavor for what it looks like
if you've never seen XML before.
It's not trivial to parse XML,
but there are a lot of free open
source XML parsers out there.
Once we have finalized this format,
we will be releasing a parser
as part of our example code.
Okay, so there's the review of what's
new in core MIDI and what's old.
I'd like to go to machine five now.
Is it awake?
Yeah.
And just give you a quick
look at our audio MIDI
Saw some screenshots from this earlier.
This is--this loopback device
is a driver which I use for
debugging and I don't need it.
and here's a Roland UM-880,
Etch-It's-Etter-All.
We saw that earlier.
That's my MIDI interface.
And I can define an external device.
And I can double click
on it and give it a name.
This is going to get a bit
more elaborate with more of the
properties I talked about earlier.
And then having created
this external device,
I can show how it's connected
to my MIDI interface.
It doesn't have to be symmetrical.
I can say the MIDI out from
port one goes into my synth,
and the output of my
synth goes into port four.
So that's actually all there is to it.
Can I go back to the slides, please?
So in a moment,
Bill Stewart's going to talk about
some larger scheduling and threading
issues related to audio and MIDI and how
they fit into the rest of the system.
But as a lead-in to that
part of this session,
I'd just like to touch on a
few issues relating to the
MIDI system and threading.
The core MIDI framework,
which your applications use,
is completely thread-safe,
meaning that you can call
any function from any thread.
The core MIDI server framework,
which only driver writers
really need to know about,
is not thread-safe.
You need to make all of your
calls other than your I/O calls,
which happen on really
high-priority I/O threads,
but all your other calls have
to happen on the main thread.
On the client side,
when you create a MIDI input port,
your read proc for that input port,
no matter how many
input ports you create,
all of those read procs get serviced
by a single high-priority thread.
[Transcript missing]
All of the notification callbacks
that your client gets get called
from the run loop or thread on
which you first called core MIDI,
which would typically be your
application's main thread.
This is good to know because
You can draw from that thread in
response to the notifications.
You don't have to worry about
synchronization issues if you're
accessing global data structures
where you're mirroring what
Core MIDI is telling you is there.
Okay, so that's the end of this section
of the talk about core MIDI,
and I'd like to bring up
Bill Stewart to talk about audio,
MIDI, and thread priorities.
Okay, so I'm going to probably venture
where angels feed a thread and tread.
[Transcript missing]
So, first off, let's start sort of from
the top and work down.
Basically, audio devices themselves,
and if we're talking about USB,
MIDI devices,
etc., they're using interrupts to deal
with the actual hardware interfacing.
And so, for the hell part of this,
we actually expect that the audio drivers
themselves supply very accurate timing
information so that the audio system can
actually correctly schedule your I.O.
And so,
it's probably the single most important
thing that a driver needs to do,
aside from its actual handling of I.O.,
is to supply this timing information.
And the... The process of getting the
data to and from the drivers is actually
done in the time-constrained threads,
including any transformation
from a floating-point format
to the driver's native format.
And we call that mix and clip.
And so, that actually runs on the context
that your application is doing,
that your application is seeing and
doing the work that it's doing for audio.
And this sort of brings us
to time-constrained threads.
Time-constrained threads
are fixed-priority threads.
They'll be seen by the
system as a priority of 96.
By fixed-priority,
I mean that the priority
won't degrade over time,
and the system will continue to use
this as a very high-priority thread.
When you create a
time-constrained thread,
you give it information to the system
about some of the time conditions that
you expect to be met by the scheduler
when they're running that thread.
And one of the most important of these
is actually the timeout period that the
scheduler will use before it looks to
see if there's another thread to run.
The core audio I/O proc thread
is a time constraint thread,
as you probably know.
The I/O threads of the MIDI server
are also time constraint threads.
This is done in order to
meet the very tight and very
real deadlines that I/O has,
particularly in the case of MIDI,
you're talking about not introducing any
jitter into the transport of MIDI data.
In the case of audio, of course,
you don't want to get
glitches or missed data.
Colonel tasks,
if we're sort of going down now,
the Colonel does all of its
work at fixed priority as well,
and that's a fixed priority of 80.
And we're still not at your
application level at this point.
So there is going to be work
being done in the Colonel,
and one of the biggest jobs that we
have internally in talking to the
Colonel team is to make sure that they're
not going to be introducing problems
by doing more work in the Colonel and
not introducing problems in the kernel.
And so we spend some time with them,
and they spend a lot of time just going
through the system and making sure
this works as we would like it to.
If we get to the application level,
you have both fixed priority
threads available to you
and the timeshare threads.
Fixed priority threads in Jaguar
have got some very important
changes in the way that they behave.
Basically,
they're given some special privileges.
These special privileges are to
preempt some of the activities
that are going on in the kernel.
Otherwise, you tend to get,
and I think we've seen
this in some cases,
you tend to get a problem
of priority inversion.
You may get some activity
that you've made a call and
you've made that call from,
say, a 33 thread.
That ends up having to transition
to the kernel to do some work.
Then suddenly a 52 thread that needs
to do some work cannot do that work
because an 80 thread is running in
response to a low priority request.
The fixed priority threads are going to
have this ability to preempt that work
and to get to actually do their work.
Then that work will get
done after that's done.
In a very meaningful way, in Jaguar,
the fixed priority threads will
tend to behave very much like the
real-time time constraints thread.
They'll have some
special abilities to run.
The understanding is that they
have tasks that really have some
time-sensitive elements to them.
The highest priority
that's available to you,
both for fixed and for timeshare threads,
is 63.
In the user space,
except for the time-constrained thread,
of course.
Then you can go down from there.
The Windows Server has been an
issue of much debate in terms of
where it does its work and what
priorities it uses to do its work.
In Jaguar, we've been talking to them and
giving them feedback from some
developers about the fact that they
are getting some of the work that the
Windows Server does can actually cause
undesirable effects in a 10.1 system.
So there's been some changes
to the Windows Server,
a lot of changes I'm sure that have
been covered in other sessions.
The one that we most care about is
that in a Jaguar system there's going
to be very little work done at the 63
thread that the Windows Server runs.
That 63 thread will basically just
be an event type thread and then any
work that needs to be done from that
will be dispatched to a lower priority
thread and that thread is running at 51.
You can see multiple 51 threads if
you're running a dual processor machine.
You see 151 thread per CPU.
The 51 thread in the 10.1
system is going to be a very,
very complex system.
It's going to be a very complex system.
It's going to be is being used to do
compositing by the Windows server,
and it will now in Jaguar be used to
also field requests from applications.
A good example of this
is calling findWindow.
FindWindow is a Carbon call,
and on a Mac OS system,
that was just to look up
something in a global record.
In a Carbon on a Mac OS X system,
that ends up being a mark
message to the Windows server,
and it was doing that work
at the 63 priority thread,
so you'd get this unexpected
behavior where it would just
take away time from you.
And then some of the work
the Windows server does...
Some of the work that the
Windows Server is asked to do can
involve transitions to the kernel,
and so the need for fixed priority
threads to be able to pre-empt that.
Fixed priority threads
are used in the Carbon.
There's three threads that would relate
to interrupts on a Mac OS system.
There's a time manager,
the async file and the
deferred task threads,
and those are the priorities.
They're published as fixed
priority threads in a Fuma system,
and that'll be the same
in a Jaguar system.
MP threads, which are another Carbon API,
are currently timeshare threads,
and there will be some additional APIs in
Jaguar to allow you to set the policy of
those threads to being fixed priority.
So just to recap how this all lines
up if we go from top to bottom.
We start off with the
interrupts from the hardware,
then we've got a scheduler
running above that.
And then we have the time constraint
threads that are used by both
the audio and the MIDI system.
Kernel tasks, the MIDI client thread,
we're considering taking that out
of the real-time band so that it
doesn't compete with the I/O and
taking that to a fixed priority of 63.
And then we look at the event
thread of the Windows server at 63,
fixed priority threads for Carbon,
and then the Carbon MP threads
will be user-definable,
including their policy.
The main problem,
I guess I should have said,
in a timeshare policy,
and I'll show you this in a minute,
the priority will degrade,
and we'll see why fixed priority becomes
a very important thing for you to use.
And then you've got down at
the bottom your main thread,
which will typically be
somewhere around the 30s.
So if we can go to demo machine three.
Okay,
so this is an app that we wrote because
we were really needing to try and
understand how threading was going to
affect audio applications and how the
system guys really needed to understand
the kinds of activities that audio and
MIDI apps are doing and the kinds of
behaviors that we need from the system
in order to get the guarantees that those
apps need in order to do their work.
I'm going to launch
this from the terminal.
This app is called Million Monkeys
and it's a reference to Shakespeare,
I guess.
The idea of this app is not to
show you how to write a threaded
application for doing audio.
In fact,
our main purpose of this was to create
a very fragile situation so that we
could look at the problems of threading,
the problems of getting
guarantees in order to run,
and to try and understand what is
causing those problems and get diagnosis
from those problems and fix them.
This is actually on your Jaguar CD,
so you can run this at home and in the
office if you're not working at home.
You can use this to actually help
us to file bugs and help us to
understand where there may be latencies
being introduced into the system.
This uses a tool that is covered
in some other talks called latency.
Latency is an ability for you to see
what the latency of the scheduler is.
In order to run latency,
you need to execute the
application as root.
That's why I ran it
from the command line.
This is probably the most exciting
audio content you'll hear all week.
It's a sine wave and
I thought I'd turn that off.
What we're seeing here is that,
this feeder thread is being run at
a priority of 63 and it's not fixed.
All these purple lines mean that
that thread is missing its deadline.
I'm telling the thread that I want
it to consume 80% of its CPU.
The sine wave,
the crackling that you can hear there is
the fact that even though I think I've
set this to the maximum priority I can,
I'm not being able to do my work at
all and I'm overloading like crazy.
If I'm able to make this
a fixed priority thread,
then I'm able to actually maintain my
priority and I'm not going to degrade.
When it's not fixed priority,
as you take time,
and I'm taking a lot of time here,
the system degrades that priority.
You can see just by making
this a fixed priority thread,
I'm able to actually get the
work done and utilize 80% of
the CPU in my second thread.
and what I'm going to do here now is to
run this again using an execution trace
and I'll show you what that looks like.
So I'm going to start like
this here and then I'm going
to put this up to a 63 thread.
Then I'm stopping it and what
I can do is click here and this is
the trace that latency gives me.
And I can step through
backwards and I can see,
okay, so I overloaded at this point.
Now,
was this a thread scheduling problem?
It doesn't look like it.
And so I probably know at this point
that it was because at that point
I was running it as a timeshare thread.
And I can go through and each,
when you're doing the trace itself,
each time the time the thread is running,
you're running it as a timeshare thread.
And we basically look at from the
time the I/O thread ran to the time
that our feeder thread got to run
and we look at what was happening in
the system between those two times.
And we're trying to understand
what is holding off my second
thread from running if that's okay.
So here's a longer trace and you
can see that this took actually 365
microseconds for it to actually run.
And I can go through here and I can
see what was it that from this time,
this is the point here when
I was trying to get to run,
to this point here when
I actually got to run,
what was going on in the system?
Well,
the window manager was doing something.
At this point,
we would probably turn around
to the kernel guys and say,
"There is a kernel task going
on here." We'd turn around to
the scheduler guys and we'd say,
"There really is something going on
here that we need to understand,"
and we'd give them the tool,
and away we go from there.
We'd really encourage you to use this
tool to help us to track down these
bugs because this basically will help
all of the applications work very well.
If we can go back to the slides.
So just to conclude before we do Q&A,
there's a whole bunch of new APIs,
so look for them in Jaguar.
We've had some apps that are shipping
already using Cordio and MIDI.
We're seeing some device drivers coming
out for both audio and MIDI devices,
and we're very enthusiastic about that
and very pleased to see that progress,
and we hope,
particularly with the changes in Jaguar,
that we'll see a lot more of this.
And once again,
I'd like to reiterate a point
that you've probably heard
from a lot of Doug's comments,
but in particular earlier, and Jeff's,
is that we really do
listen to your feedback.
We really would like to encourage
you to continue to tell us
things that you're missing,
things that you like about the system,
things you don't like about the system,
and we do try to respond and
make this as good a system for
you to use as we possibly can.
Here's some roadmap.
We had a session yesterday where
we were doing 3D mixing and stuff.
In the session after this one,
we'll be talking about writing audio
units and some of the audio codecs.
There's a short discussion of AAC,
which is implemented using the new
audio codec component on Friday.
We have,
in this room on Friday afternoon,
a feedback forum.
If you've got any more complex
questions or comments or discussions,
then it might be a good forum
to come to and bring that up.
and Craig Craig will be able to
fill general comments and so forth.
There's his email contacts.
We have an API list which is public,
list.apple.com.
We have SDKs.
All the code that we're doing
this week we will endeavor to
get out to the developers for
you guys to download next week.
Just keep an eye on that website.
We'll put a link up for
that then and do Q&A.